One of the things that I read about you was that you worked in a sand mine when
you were young, that you dug sand all day.
Yeah. That was growing up. Um, I was 10,
about 10 years old when I started that because I was in the village and, uh,
where, where I grew up after my leaving my aunt house,
I went to my grandma and we had to like do something, you know,
we had to work to contribute at home, uh, to buy oil,
to buy food and also for our scholarship for books.
So we have to do you have to work and <affirmative>,
that's how we started, even though you, that work was, um,
meant for adult, but we didn't have any option.
So we take what we had at the time.
Growing up, doing something like that. Dad's got to, first of all,
it had to be very difficult, like very digging sand. It's also,
your body must develop very strong from doing something like that at 10
years old. Like as you're growing, as you're maturing doing something,
that's that difficult. I mean, it must have made you really strong.
Yeah. I, I hope so. But.
What I was, well, obviously it did, but it's just genetics too.
There's a lot of good things that, that came your way that way. But,
but also the difficulty of doing something when you're that young,
such hard labor, I mean, it had to teach you discipline.
There had to be like some POS it's terrible that you had to do that at 10. Yeah.
But there had to be some positive aspects of it.
Some positive repercussions of it. Oh.
Definitely. I mean, uh, I didn't like,
like my life and, uh, I felt,
I always felt like I missed my childhood.
Like it's something missing in it because, uh, it's been too much,
um, frustration. Yeah. In my life, you know? Um,
like I had to work by that age and he wasn't enough. Like,
uh, when the school, when school started, when school starts all the time,
I gonna go to school.
And most of the time still didn't have a pen to take note
or a notebook to write on it sometime, uh,
no shoes or clothes just have to wear, like my, uh,
uniform was tear all, all, all over. And, um,
I was frustrated to look around and see other kids looking good. You know,
they went to the Vaca. Uh, they went in vacation to this family.
Men number came back with all brand new stuff.
And I was just there looking crappy with my, I have to,
I had to like take my old book and look for empty page to take a
note, expecting, hoping that when I have a book,
I will copy the note from this year in the new book.
But at first I have to use the, I always had to use the old book.
And most of the time teachers, they don't understand why you don't have a book.
They don't understand why you don't have a pen.
Sometimes they just think that you didn't tell your parent, you should, uh,
um, tell your parents so they can buy it for you.
They don't understand that you can't not just afford it. You know,
your parent can't and, um, they'll kill you out from the classroom.
Maybe just to say, go tell your parents and,
and you can tell them we can't afford it. You didn't wanna say it. Then the, um,
they knew they know what can they do? Nothing. You know,
because most of the time it's gonna be, even with the money that I work,
that they're gonna buy my pen or my book. Yeah. But, uh,
you work sometime and they don't pay you right away is maybe a after month
months, you know?
So all the process and sometime they'll just kick you out from the school
because of the, um, scholarship fee, uh,
you, you haven't paid on time, so they kick you out. So I was a subject,
I was subject of shame to other kick. Yeah. You know,
because all the time when they kick you out in front of 50, 60,
uh, uh, student, it's not a good thing, you know? And, um,
I couldn't have a friend because you know how things work.
You have to be able to bring something on the table
to, uh, enjoy, you know,
but since you don't even have a pen or a book to take no to take note,
nobody expect you to, uh, bring a lunch, um,
um, lunch or to buy something, uh, in the break,
break time to share with them. So they don't wanna share with you things.
They don't have any hope that you will share, have something to share with them.
And I was always in retreat. I always stay in retreat.
And that's how I technically grew up by myself.
I end up like, not even trying to have a friend, I'm like, okay,
this is my situ. Maybe I just, I feel, uh, okay,
just retreat myself.
Not just to try all the time and get shame of it all the time. You know,
I always,
I retreat and don't have to deal with these people with their opinion on me.
And, um, but that motivated me at some point, I'm like,
look, this kid they're looking at me like, I'm, I was nothing.
But technically I was more than them because, uh,
I'm working, you know, uh,
even though what I have is less than what they have,
I deserve what I have. I work hard for it and they don't do, they don't work.
They don't deserve. They're just a kid. Right. They work. And their,
their parent provide for them. I, I'm not just lucky.
I'm not just lucky to have the chance, but I'm still trying,
which me, I'm not bad at the end of the day. You know?
So that's that pushed me to, like, from there,
I wanted something to prove them wrong. I'm like, okay,
I cannot do something that can to prove this kid that I'm not beneath them.
So that gave you motivation. Yes.
That gave me motivation because that frustration, I was full of frustration.
And I want to like drive this into something.
Like I have to prove them. I can't go to the party.
I can't be between, I can't have friend I, any,
anyone and I have to work hard than anyone, you know? Um,
my schools was like, my, um,
middle school was, I think
about six miles from home.
So it took me almost two hours to get at school. So you walked? Yeah.
So I walked around about two hours and, uh,
before meet the first student is at least after
like 40 minutes walk, you know?
So I have to wake up at five, just get ready,
start at work sometime with not, uh, not eating.
Then I get to school and the school, uh,
close at maybe four to five. But since I didn't eat in the morning,
uh, by noon, one or two, I'm hungry, I'm starving. I can't take it anymore.
I will leave school sometime, you know, just because I was hungry
or if I, uh, if I have a chance,
if I had a chance to have breakfast or something,
I won't eat before I leave home, because I know if I eat at five or six,
I will get hungry early ill take it at school to eat maybe around
10 so I can resist onto the end. Mm. You know? And that's, uh,
how I, I did it my, um, this entire time.
So my, um, my process was all different from,
from other kids. And, uh, nobody could have understand that,
you know,
he was just on me and I was the only one knowing what I'm dealing with
exactly. To get there. So,
and all those things keep kept frustrating me. I'm like,
I can show this. I'm gonna show them, like, how long did you have to work.
In these, uh, sand mines.
Until I left school until I finally, I left school, I was 17.
And then I keep doing it.
And then I, so you did it from 10 to 17. You did it all through school. Yeah.
And what, when.
Did, that was the only thing to do, right? When.
Did you do it? Like if you went to school during the day,
when did you work in the sand lines?
Over the weekend? Over the, um, holidays,
because I never, uh, have a chance to go to.
I never had a chance to go to holiday even for the summer holiday,
which is like three months.
That would be because we have a tropical climate.
So at that moment we have two season wet season and dry
season, and that's a wet season. So it's almost rain all the time.
Kids go to vacation and all those stuff, uh,
adult doesn't wanna work because it's raining all the time.
Guess what? That was opportunity when they don't wanna work.
So we have a chance to work.
Otherwise they will come back to their job. We will not have job. Right.
You know? So that was a good opportunity to work under the rain all the time.
Like get back home shaking because all day long it's been raining.
So you have to stay, uh, because as,
as soon as you stop working, moving, you get cool. You just get freezing.
So you get active. It force you to stay active and to work even more.
And our employer will,
will love that because you work even more than normal.
And, uh, yeah. So that's how we, we do it.
And sometime, uh, after school,
I will stop at the same mind if I have like a quick job,
maybe if a truck comes and, uh, they have to load it.
If I have a place to load, because you load, they give money to share,
you get something sometime, sometime not.
And when I was a kid, most of the time they kick you out.
Other didn't want you on it. I'm like, eh, get away of you. You know,
because the less, they are more money they get.
So they don't want you to around. <laugh> really.
I, I saw that you went,
you went back recently and you taken photos of you
in the sand. Mine where you worked as a boy. But I see that on Instagram. Yeah.
What was that like?
I always do that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, when I'm home,
I always like to do that. It's kind of like, he really,
really hurts me to remember everything,
like where I came from, how he was, you know,
every time that I get, when I, that I go back home, I would go back to those,
all those places that I used to, uh, work there. I,
I hated this thing growing up. Oh, you can't imagine. I hated the sand, mine,
everything. I hated my life.
But today it seems like if you, for my life today, I have to feel,
feel up from that life, go back there, cities <affirmative> because most people,
there are still people that we grew up together.
And he allows me to see how far I came from. Mm. You know,
like, I think it's the,
the moment that I enjoy the most is like those moment, you know,
going back, go to my, uh,
the house that I grew up into, even though we fix it today is not the same,
but the environment like sleeping have all this nostalgic, uh,
wake, uh, at five o'clock, all this, uh, animal sounds from outside the bed,
the bed beds, all those sound was just like,
very familiar. Bring you back from 20 to 25 years ago,
the smells, everything reminds you something.
And this always my best moment,
like I can go there and, uh, live in the five star hotel,
do some crazy stuff. But he doesn't, I don't, I don't enjoy that as much.
Like, I don't know how to explain it, but <laugh>,
I always do it. Like, I always go back to the sand.
This is like a tradition now just for them,
because he hurts me. I like it. I feel like, okay,
you know, it's kind of like taking my revenge of life, like, okay.
I used to be here thinking this,
thinking that dreaming of this dreaming of that today, I have this look,
that's my car. Look, that's my truck.
<Laugh>.
Yeah, look, that's my house. Look,
this my life I can and fly back to America, even though I'm here,
you know? Yeah. So it's like living a dream. Yeah.
Because back then that was just a dream, a crazy dream. Unbelievable.
So I'm living into it right now. Like yes. Doing this 20 years ago,
I was dreaming like, man, how is this to be in the airplane, going somewhere,
imagine yourself being the airplane,
going to America or to France or something. Wow.
And I go back, I do the same. I'm like, guess what?
I'm going back to America in one week. <laugh> yeah.
Right. You're living the dream. Yeah. Yeah. And so it just, just re reminds,
you just put, puts you back in that place. Yeah.
And, uh, what is crazy is like,
most of the time it's gonna be with the same guy that I grew up with. Wow.
That in the same place doing the same thing. And, uh, what.
Is it like for them? Do they ask you questions? Like man.
You know, and that's why I feel, uh,
very lucky just to have a different mindset just to even have a dream,
because they don't even have a dream. Most of those people,
like if you ask them like, okay, what do you,
what is your dream? What, where would you like to be in like one years,
five years from now? Doesn't know he gave up long time ago.
He doesn't give a about it. As soon as, as long as he has something to eat, uh,
before go to bed, he's okay. That's it. And now I'm like,
how can somebody leave like this? Right.
But it's still alive. You can't do anything I'm like,
but then you will find someone, some people, uh, which is a little different.
They, they are like, they have a dream. They're hoping to, uh,
change their life. Those people over years, you can see the,
in their life improvement step by step. Like this year,
they're gonna say, ah, I want to do this.
I wish I can do this next year. Guess what?
Even though they didn't do that, they didn't get that done. They get closer.
And next year, and next year, and next year they move up.
But those who doesn't have a dream, you know,
it's just there like that.
Do you find some of the people there that do have a dream look at you and they
get inspired? They.
Say, yeah, those who has, and they, and I think that's, um,
even why, um,
some of the reason will keep me going back and like,
even in the foundation,
like once I had like a really good friend of mine,
this guy is in the village and he is doing good.
He's doing his businesses doing good for a village guy.
Like, sometime I will come there he'll even give me like a whiskey,
find a good whiskey for me. And he said, man, you know,
like you just going in America and come back here means a
lot to us. Like we grew up together. That mean it's possible for us too,
that, uh, drive us through our dream, like motivate us. Like,
yes, if Francis did it, I mean,
I might Don do the same thing, but I can get to what I want to, you know?
And uh, I'm like, thank you. I, I really appreciate his work.
And he was like very humble explaining me things. And yeah.
And that's why I also like, uh, doing my foundation.
I like to like tell this kid, like, listen, I'm not a, a,
a fairer, I'm not a story that you watch on TV. Um,
uh, that you read in the book. I'm in fact, I grew up here. Most of you,
uh, know me before I even, I even live here. Um,
which mean it's possible, you know,
as long as you believe in something in a dream, uh,
as long as you have a dream and believe in yourself,
I think a success is just a matter of time.
Catch new episodes. The Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips,
easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience
on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.